Do you ever feel disadvantaged?
Do you feel that perhaps
because of unfavorable circumstances
over which you have no control,
you just don’t have a fair chance in life?
Maybe you feel that in the race of life
others seem to be able to run freely
but you have to run with a crutch.
In this program,
we’re going to talk
about a very endearing aspect
of Jehovah’s personality:
his loving care for the disadvantaged.
We’ll delve into his feelings for such ones,
his respect for them,
and his long history of caring for them.
We’ll also consider
how Jehovah’s care of the lowly ones
draws us closer to him
and how it can reassure you
if you face disadvantages in your life.
To begin with,
who are the disadvantaged?
When we speak
of disadvantaged ones in this discussion,
we’re not talking
about the inadequacies of the person
but, rather,
of the unfortunate circumstances in life
that one must contend with.
Often a person inherits the situation
through no fault of his own.
Among such ones,
the Bible specifically mentions widows,
orphans, and foreign residents.
Notice this at Deuteronomy 24:17:
“You must not pervert the judgment
of the foreign resident
“or of the fatherless child,
“and you must not seize
the garment of a widow
as security for a loan.”
The Watchtower  said:
“The Law specifically protected those
“who could not protect themselves,
such as orphans,
widows, and foreign residents.”
Psalm 10:14 refers to such ones
as “unfortunate victim[s].”
The Bible also uses the term “lowly ones,”
not because they’re less important,
but because of their circumstances.
Our next main question is,
How does Jehovah feel about such ones?
We really see a beautiful aspect
of Jehovah’s personality here
—his compassion and empathy—
in action.
Since a widow doesn’t have a husband
to care for her,
an orphan doesn’t have parents
to provide for and protect him,
and a foreigner has no advocate,
Jehovah steps in
and fills those roles personally.
Notice this in the wording of Psalm 68:5:
“A father of the fatherless
and a protector of widows
is God in his holy dwelling.”
Jehovah himself assumes
the responsibility left vacated.
He becomes the Father;
he becomes the Protector.
As their Protector,
note how he views their care
at Exodus 22:22-24:
“You must not afflict any widow
or fatherless child.
“If you afflict him at all,
so that he cries out to me,
“I will unfailingly hear his outcry;
“and my anger will blaze,
“and I will kill you with the sword,
“and your wives will become widows,
and your children will be fatherless.”
Regarding this verse,
The Watchtower  said:
“Notice that Jehovah did not
leave it up to the human judges in Israel
“to enforce this law.
“God himself would execute judgment
upon anyone
who took advantage of a defenseless child.”
This is how personally
Jehovah takes the care
of the lowly, disadvantaged ones.
They become his responsibility;
they come under his protection.
Jehovah personally makes up for any
disadvantage they may have.
The fact that Jehovah takes
personal responsibility for such ones
is further seen at Proverbs 19:17:
“The one showing favor to the lowly
“is lending to Jehovah,
and He will repay him for what he does.”
Let’s walk through the process
that this verse describes.
First, we assist the lowly,
or we show favor to them,
in some way.
We help them in a practical way,
we encourage them,
we make sure they get justice
or care for something else
they’re in need of.
Well, as discussed,
Jehovah has assumed the responsibility
to care for these disadvantaged ones.
So when we step in and assist,
Jehovah views this
as if we are giving to him,
assisting him with his responsibility.
Jehovah doesn’t view it as a gift or payment
but as a loan.
What’s the difference
between a gift and a loan?
A loan must be repaid.
Imagine,
when we assist the disadvantaged,
Jehovah actually views himself
as indebted to us lowly humans!
Jehovah will repay that debt
with favor and blessings.
Without a doubt,
Jehovah feels strongly
about the care of disadvantaged ones.
Let’s consider this a little further.
Because of Jehovah’s love
and compassion for the disadvantaged,
he enacted laws to protect them in Israel.
In these laws, we see the depth
of Jehovah’s understanding
and his tender care
and protection of such ones.
Consider just two examples.
First, let’s look at his law
regarding a security for a loan.
We find this at Exodus 22:26, 27:
“If you seize the garment of your fellow man
“as security for a loan,
“you are to return it to him by sunset.
“For it is his only covering,
his clothing to cover his body;
“in what will he lie down to sleep?
“When he cries out to me,
I will certainly hear,
for I am compassionate.”
There’s compassion in this law
for any poor Israelite
who might find himself in this situation.
However, note the additional stipulation
made in the case of widows,
as stated at Deuteronomy 24:17:
“You must not pervert the judgment
of the foreign resident
“or of the fatherless child,
“and you must not seize
the garment of a widow
as security for a loan.”
In the widow’s case,
no Israelite
was to take her garment as security at all!
Jehovah evidently
wanted to eliminate any chance
that she’d be left overnight
without her garment to keep her warm.
Isn’t that beautiful?
Don’t we see Jehovah’s special love and care
for disadvantaged ones in a law like this?
Here’s a second example
of a law made to help the lowly ones.
In this case,
it was related to the sacrifices
the Israelites were to make to Jehovah
for the forgiveness of their sins.
We know the importance of blood
in regard to sacrifices
to atone ones from sin.
Leviticus 17:11 tells us
that “it is the blood that makes atonement.”
However, note the provision
made for the very poor in Israel,
found at Leviticus 5:11:
“Now if he cannot afford
two turtledoves or two young pigeons,
“he must bring as his offering for his sin
a tenth of an ephah of fine flour
for a sin offering.”
Regarding this, The Watchtower  said:
“For the very poor,
Jehovah chose to make an exception
“and allow a sin offering without blood.
“In Israel, poverty denied no one
the blessing of atonement
or the privilege of making peace with God.”
The Watchtower  continued:
“Does that mean that the flour offerings
of the poor were worthless?
“No.
“Jehovah surely valued the humble,
“willing spirit behind such offerings.
“Furthermore, the sins of the entire nation
“—including the poor—
“were covered by the blood
of the animals offered to God
on the annual Day of Atonement.”
In this we see Jehovah’s reasonableness,
his compassion,
and his love for the disadvantaged.
No one was left out,
and they received the same refreshment
from their sacrifice as any other Israelite.
So far in our discussion,
we’ve highlighted that Jehovah
takes personal responsibility
for the care of disadvantaged ones.
He steps in and fills the vacated role.
And when we assist such ones,
he views it as lending to him.
Further, we see his love and compassion
in the laws he enacted
to protect such ones in Israel.
Here’s an important question:
When you think about the special place
Jehovah has in his heart
for disadvantaged ones,
how does that make you feel about him?
Doesn’t it draw you closer to Jehovah?
We can’t help but love him for it.
Jehovah’s love and care for the disadvantaged
is in such stark contrast
to the way such ones
are often treated in the world.
Sadly, the world often
steps on the disadvantaged
—taking more advantage of them
because they can.
Further, whom does the world
praise and promote?
Isn’t it typically the beautiful, the rich,
the talented, the funny, the charismatic?
Whereas the common person,
even more so the disadvantaged,
often doesn’t receive such favor.
By contrast, Jehovah is on the lookout
for the lowly ones.
This brings us to our next question:
How is this reassuring for those of us
who are disadvantaged in one way or another?
At the outset, we asked that question:
Do you feel disadvantaged?
What are your circumstances?
Maybe because of your situation,
you relate to the widow, the orphan,
or the foreign resident in Israel.
And while the Mosaic Law
specifically mentioned those three,
we could broaden those groups today,
couldn’t we?
For example,
we certainly have widows in our midst today,
and our hearts truly go out
to these dear ones.
But couldn’t we also include in this group
wives who are neglected or abused
by their husbands
verbally, emotionally, or physically?
Such ones don’t have the normal protection
expected of a husband.
Couldn’t we also include single parents
—either because of the death of a mate
or because of divorce or abandonment?
Along with orphans, couldn’t we include
children of single parents,
children of parents
addicted to alcohol or drugs,
or children of parents suffering
from severe depression
or other debilitating mental illness?
In these cases, the children
may not be getting the normal care
and training that’s due them.
And what about foreigners?
These are disadvantaged
because they have no advocate,
no legal recourse, for protection.
Couldn’t we also include in this group
ones who are minorities in the land
where they live
and so are often discriminated against?
Really, we could include any
who do not have
the normal protection due them
or just don’t have
the same opportunities as others
and any who feel disadvantaged,
such as the impoverished,
the disabled, those with a lack of education
or training,
those who because of unfavorable
circumstances in their youth
didn’t get a fair chance,
and the list could go on.
What makes you feel disadvantaged?
Well, all of Jehovah’s loving,
tender care for the lowly ones
who we discussed earlier applies to you.
Jehovah feels just as strongly
about your situation
as he did for the widow
and orphan and foreign resident in Israel.
He takes personal responsibility
for your care and protection.
Note what the Bible says
about him at Isaiah 57:15:
“For this is what
the High and Lofty One says,
“who lives forever and whose name is holy:
“‘I reside in the high and holy place,
“‘but also with those
crushed and lowly in spirit,
“‘to revive the spirit of the lowly
and to revive
the heart of those being crushed.’”
Here Jehovah says
that he resides with the lowly ones.
That means that he doesn’t just see
your situation from afar.
He doesn’t just come and go quickly.
No, this gives the sense that he sits down,
he gets comfortable, and he stays with you.
And for what purpose
does he remain close to you?
To revive your spirit and your heart.
He has open concern for your welfare.
Have you personally experienced
Jehovah’s loving help in your situation?
Of course, living during the time that we do,
we know that we can’t expect Jehovah
to shield us from every hardship
that comes our way.
But have you seen him help you endure?
Have you experienced him provide for you?
Have you seen him answer a prayer
at just the right time?
Have you come across a scripture
or article from the publications
that gave you just what you needed
when you needed it?
Have you seen Jehovah’s care
through a thoughtful word
or timely practical help from one of your
brothers or sisters in the congregation?
That is Jehovah residing with you!
You are not alone.
Jehovah is reviving your heart.
He has assumed responsibility for your care.
He takes it personally.
You are important to him!
And we just love him for it, don’t we?
There’s something else that Jehovah
does to help the disadvantaged.
He gives you hope.
You will not be downtrodden forever.
Jehovah’s care for the disadvantaged
will be fully expressed
in the new world
when all disadvantages will be removed.
Psalm 145:16 says:
“You open your hand and satisfy the desire
of every living thing.”
Not just the prominent
and not just the favored
but Jehovah will “satisfy the desire
of every living thing.”
That includes you.
The Watchtower  said:
“The fulfillment of Jehovah’s promises
will be so impressive
“that the difficulties and trials
of the present time
“will pale into insignificance.
“In the coming Paradise,
“the blessings from Jehovah
will surpass our imagination.
And we will certainly
experience unprecedented happiness.”
Nothing will be missing in Paradise.
Nothing will be unfair.
Every person will have every advantage.
Praised be Jehovah God,
the Protector of the disadvantaged ones.
We hope that this discussion
has reassured you,
reminded you of Jehovah’s tender care,
and given you confidence
that Jehovah will always be there for you.
He will always protect you,
whatever your disadvantage may be.
And in the end,
Jehovah has reserved a beautiful future
for all those seeking refuge in him.